In this lecture, we're going to learn how we can take screenshots in Selenium Web driver.
So why are screenshots useful?
Screenshots act as evidence.
They can help debug problems.
If we have a test that fails, then we'd want to see the visual evidence as to why it failed.
Screenshots are important from a report in perspective as they give context behind the failure.
We can give screenshot files a specific name to prevent file overwrite.
So some things we need to know.
We are going to create a couple of methods.
One.
To contain the screenshot code and a second to generate screenshot file name using date and time.
We are going to need to import an external jar called Apache Commons IO, which is simply a library
of utilities to assist with developing IO functionality.
This will allow us to write a file to a folder on our local machine, e.g. when we take a screenshot
and save the file locally.
So let's look at an example.
So the first thing I'm going to do is download the Apache Commons audio jar.
So I am going to open up Chrome and using a search engine.
I'm going to type in Apache Commons IOU Jar and search.
And the first one that should return is to the Commons to Apache dot org website.
And if we click this, we've got the options to download the binaries.
So I am going to download version 2.8.0 bin zip, which will start the download process.
And then once that finishes, if I click on that folder, you'll see that there is a folder here with
a number of your files inside it.
So I am going to control C to copy this.
And if we go back to our desktop, we had the resources folder and I am just going to paste that folder
here like so.
So the next step that would have to do is to import this jar file into our project in Eclipse.
So once that completes.
I'm then going to open up the clips and I'm going to right click the intro folder, go to properties.
Go to Java build path.
Go to the library.
Sad.
And then what I'm going to do here is select the class path and then add external jobs.
And then going to go to the resources folder on the desktop and click on the Commons I o folder and
then import all these jars like so and then click apply and Close.
So we've now imported the relevant GI that we need for this lesson.
So the next thing I'm going to do is then copy and paste the class from the last lecture call in this
1l044 lecture four and given a name of screen shot and then click okay.
I'm gonna open up that glass and I'm going to delete everything up to the driver got manage maximize
line.
So as mentioned in the slides, I'm going to create two methods.
The first method is going to be responsible for creating the screenshot file, and it's going to be
responsible for taking the actual screenshots.
And the second method is going to be used to generate the file name based on the date and time.
So outside these brackets, I'm going to create my first method and I'm going to call this public static
void.
Take snap shots and in brackets and in the open and close embrace.
So inside of these brackets, I'm going to provide a parameter.
So it's going to be Web driver and I'm going to call it Web driver.
So what this means is when we call this method, we need to provide a Web driver instance.
At the time of when we called this method in our code.
So I would explain in more detail in a moment.
But for now, let's just follow along.
So in the next line I am going to use file and this is a Java class.
And I'm going to give it a name of source file equals.
And I need to use two brackets.
Takes.
Screen shots.
And outside of the first bracket, I am going to provide that Webb driver.
From the method parameters.
And in outside of those brackets, I'm going to use Dot.
Get screen.
Shot.
I was.
And then a semicolon at the end of this line.
But in these brackets, I'm going to add outputs.
Tie it.
Dot file.
So you can see that there's errors on the file and take screenshot.
So if I hover over file, you see I've got an option to import it and I want the one from Java IO.
So I am going to click that.
And you can see there's also an error here.
And I've got an option to import.
Take screenshot from selenium.
In doing so, you should see.
No.
No errors.
So next line of code is going to instruct our test to move the image file to a new destination.
So I am going to use file.
Test file.
So destination file.
Equals new.
File.
Brackets.
We have double quotes inside.
And then I am going to use a semicolon at the end.
So I need to provide a location where I want to store the screenshot file.
So I'm going to do this in my resources folder.
I'm going to right click.
Let's create a new folder and I'm going to call this one screenshots.
And if I double click that folder.
And take the path.
Do control C to copy that.
And I'm going to paste it within the double quotes.
So the first thing I need to do after this is I also need to provide.
Two more.
Backslash is because once it's in the screenshot folder, it needs to create a a new file within that
folder.
And I'm going to add dots, P and G for now.
So let's leave that.
I'll come back to this because I am going to change it.
And then you see date and time.
So after this, I'm now going to copy the file to the destination location.
And I can do this by using file.
Utils.
Dot copy.
So.
File.
Mike So.
And this is going to be from the source location, which is this to the destination foul location,
which is this.
But you can see it as an error.
And if I hover over file utils, I need to add a frog declaration.
And that era should then go away.
So I am going to test using this method.
And for me to do that, I need to call this method.
When I triggered a test.
So I'm going to write here.
I'm going to call the name of that method to take a snapshot.
And in inside brackets I am going to pass the driver instance.
Like so.
So I need to add another froze declaration.
And then that should be accepted.
So what I expect this test to do is go to the so we're going to the test store.
So I'm just going to update that as well.
So the automation test in home page.
And I'm going to paste that here.
So I expect this test to open up the browser, go to automation test in home page, then call the take
snapshot method, which is this one.
And what I expect it to then do is to take a screenshot of that web page and then store it in a source
phone location.
Then I create a destination for our location, which is my resources folder.
And then all I'm doing here is copying the source file to the destination folder.
So I am going to say this, though, and try running it to see what happens.
And if I go back to Eclipse.
You'll see there's no error reported.
And if I go to my resources folder or so the resources and in screenshots folder, you'll see that there
is now a screenshot there.
And if I double click it.
It's of the Automation Home page.
So we have just taken a screenshot based on the instruction we've written in our code.
So the only problem we have is if I minimize this image, you'll see that the file hasn't got.
A name is simply called Dot Peg, which is the file extension.
And the reason for that is in eclipse.
I've used a stop and J.
So if I called it one, for example, and inside this class and tried one and again.
I see what gets placed into that screenshots folder.
You can see a new one has been created called one.
But the issue we have is that at the moment its name is static.
It's never going to change.
So if I run this test again, it's going to create a new screenshot called one, which will replace
the existing one.
And this is an issue because when we take screenshots, usually we want to retain previous screenshots
and we don't want them to replace each other.
So to get around this issue, we need to create a foil name as dynamic.
And I plan to do this by using date and time in the file name.
So this is where the second method comes into play.
So I am going to go down a couple of lines and I'm going to create a new method called public static.
String time stamp.
We've brackets and an open and close embrace.
So because we use string, we need to return a value.
So I am going to use return.
New.
And I am going to use Java's simple.
Date format.
And in brackets.
This is where we need to write the format of the dates that we want to use.
So y y y y implies the year.
M m in capitals for the mumps.
The day for the day.
And then I'm going to place a space in between that and I'm going to use hate hate for hours.
That.
Mm.
4 minutes.
Dash SS 4 seconds.
An an outside that age brackets on left click dot format.
And in brackets new.
Tight and open and close in brackets and a semicolon at the end of that line.
So you can see it as an error under simple date format.
And if I hover over it, you'll see I've got an option to import it from Java dot text.
So I am going to click that.
And also there is an error on the dates.
And you can see I've got an option to import bait from java dot util.
Make sure to select the java util one.
So this method now will create or generate a date and time as a string, and then we can use that string
within our file name.
So now instead of using one, I'm going to delete that and I'm going to add a set of double quotes and
I'm going to use the plus symbol.
This is to insert, you know, as we've seen before, we can insert variables and other such things
within a string.
And then I'm going to call this method here.
So I'm going to copy it with the brackets after that plus symbol.
And then I am going to add another plus.
And then add a single double quote.
And that gets accepted.
So now what happens is.
When we are using the destination file, it's going to find that resources screenshots folder.
We, instead of using one dot PNG is now going to call this method and this method is going to generate
a date and time stamp and then pass it back to the file name.
And then we're going to add dot PNG at the end to make it a PNG file.
So let me now save this.
And try running it.
See what happens.
And if I go back to the screenshot folder, you can see that I have now been provided a file name with
a date and a timestamp.
So this means if I run this one more time.
You'll see that the new file has been written, which hasn't overwritten the previous one.
And the reason for that is the time in seconds is later.
Then the one before.
So this is a way of how we can generate screenshots without replacing the other ones.
So the code is actually fairly simple.
It can be difficult to understand at first, but all we're doing is creating a source file using the
types that screenshot from selenium and pass in the web drive instance.
And then we're using the get screenshot as method to output a file.
We then create a destination file, which is a path to a location we want to store the screenshot in.
And here we use in timestamp.
We've been the file name to generate a unique date and time file name, which we use as part of the
file name when it's generated.
Then we simply use file utils to copy the source file to the destination file.
And we call the tape screenshot method bypass in the driver instance.
And that driver instance is then passed to this parameter when we call this method.
So I hope you found this lecture useful.
And if you're still unsure or have some questions on this code, do not worry.
We cover screenshots again as we create frameworks in this course.
But for now, at least understand how we can take screenshots and how we can create dynamic file names.
Thank you for watching.